well Kenneth Roth is a visiting
professor at Princeton University he's
also the former Executive Director of
Human Rights Watch he joins us live now
from New York welcome to Al jazer what
do you make of the Israeli Army's
conduct in the occupied West Bank in
light of this current
operation well clearly this is the
largest military operation that we've
seen in the West Bank in years I think
the big issue really um as your
correspondent just mentioned is you know
what are the legal standards that are
governing it um the ordinarily with
Israel's endless occupation the
standards should be those that apply to
law enforcement to the police on the
street and that means you know as the
correspondent just said you cannot use
lethal Force except as a last resort to
meet an imminent lethal threat
ordinarily you have to try to detain
people now it looks like that's not what
Israel is doing it is bombing away and
indeed the Israeli foreign minister
Israel Catz said this is is a war now in
war you can just shoot the other side's
combatants no need to try to capture
them nothing about Last Resort so if
Israel is now escalating its standards
for the use of lethal Force to war
standards that is a very grave
development for the people of the West
Bank now even in that case it still has
a duty to do all take all feasible
precautions to spare civilians the harm
of armed conflict but it can just shoot
to kill people whom it deems milit
now that would be you know a big big
step and I think the Secretary General
and the UN are right to be pushing back
on that because we've seen what that can
mean for Gaza the last thing we need is
for that to be replicated in the West
Bank you mentioned Gaza there I me to
what extent have the horrors of Gaza uh
allowed Israel's operations in the
occupied West Bank to happen almost
under the radar as it
were well I mean the world is horrified
by what's happening in Gaza and you know
rightful our our attention has been
focused there but you know we shouldn't
neglect the fact that you know quite
apart from these kinds of raids by the
Israeli military itself Israeli settlers
have been routinely attacking
Palestinian civilians at minimum doing
it with the Israeli Security Forces just
kind of closing their eyes to it often
actively assisted by Israeli Security
Forces so you know there has been a um
really you know a degree of Violence by
Israelis and Israeli forces that we just
haven't seen in recent history and and
it seems now to be getting worse what
about the timing then of this particular
operation in the occupied West Bank why
now you know I mean it's so hard to put
one's mind inside of netanyahu's you
know clearly he is uninterested in peace
in Gaza he keeps you know Finding ways
to obstruct the ceasefire negotiations
but you know one particularly worrying
thing you know when we talk about you
know possible parallels between Gaza and
the West Bank in Gaza as we know the
devastation caused by the Israeli
military has forcibly displaced some 90%
of the population and the two far-right
Ministers of netanyahu's government smot
Ridge and Ben Giver have talken openly
about you know their interest in in just
you know expelling 2 million
Palestinians just removing them from the
demographic balance sheet and pushing
them into egpt now Egypt doesn't want
that they've resisted but suddenly the
Israeli foreign minister started talking
about the need to displace people in the
West Bank as well and I think we really
have to nip that sentiment in the bud
because the last thing we want is this
kind of massive displacement taking
place in the West Bank too and you know
frankly the dream of the far-right
ministers in netanyahu's government is
to you know solve the problem of the
West Bank solve the problem of the
apartheid regime that Israel is
maintaining there by just getting rid of
the Palestinians now that would be you
know a massive war crime but you know
this is what you know certain members of
the Netanyahu government whose votes in
the knesset Netanyahu needs to stay in
power this is what they talk about so
you know again this is an urgent reason
to nip this in the bud and not to let
this continue down the path that we've
seen in Gaza given what you said then
how much pressure is Benjamin Netanyahu
under at the moment especially
domestically
well you know domestically he seems to
be able to get away with whatever he
does so you know apart from the families
of the hostages who are really upset
with him for basically sacrificing the
hostages to his end of this war in Gaza
he doesn't seem to be under a lot of
domestic pressure the big source of
pressure that could make a difference is
Joe Biden but Joe Biden you know says
the right thing periodically he you know
did stop delivery of the massive 2,000
pound bombs that were devastating
Palestinian neighborhoods in Gaza but
other than that it's a complete green
light for ongoing arm sales ongoing
supply of military aid and so you know
Biden says the right thing but
completely undermines it with what he
does Kenneth Roth we very much
appreciate your insights thank
you thank
you make sure to subscribe to our
channel to get the latest news from aler